Hi and welcome to this lesson on garbage collection.
Now in the previous video we took a look at something called reference counting.
So remember what reference counting is as we create objects in memory.
Python keeps track of the number of references we have to those objects that could be one reference
to references three references.
But no matter what the number of references is as soon as that reference count hits zero.
The Python memory manager then reclaims it destroys that object and reclaims the memory.
So that's called reference counting.
But sometimes that just doesn't work.
And in particular we have to look at a situation called circular references.
So what are circular references.
Well let's take a look at an example.
Let's say we have a variable.
My bar and let's say that my VAR points to object A.
So so far you know it's exactly what we've seen.
If my VAR goes away if we pointed to another object or to none then the reference count of object 8
goes from 1 to 0 and the Python memory manager at that point destroys the object.
So so far so good.
But let's suppose that object A has an instance variable let's say vol 1 that points to another object.
Let's say Object B.
So at this point what happens if we get rid of that.
My VAR pointer.
So we pointed to none.
Then the reference count of object A goes down to zero.
Now the reference count of object B is for 1 because object A's pointing to B but the reference count
of object A has gone down to zero.
And so by reference counting it will get destroyed once it gets destroyed.
Object B's reference count also goes down to zero and it gets destroyed as well.
So by destroying my VAR by removing that reference the python memory manager through reference counting
will get rid of object A and B.
So so far no problem.
But now let's suppose that object B also has an instance variable let's say var 2 and 2 points back
to object A.
Now we have a circular reference.
So what happens if we get rid of the.
My VAR reference.
So if that goes away then the reference count for object 8 you will notice is 1 still right.
It was 2 because my VAR was pointing to a B was pointing to a.
So a had a reference count of two.
My vote went away.
Right.
So the reference count now on a is 1 it's not 0 and the reference count on B is also 1 because 8 is
pointing to be.
So in this case reference counting isn't going to destroy either A or B it can't because they both have
references that both have a reference count that is non-zero and that is called a circular reference.
And because the Python memory manager cannot clean that up if we were to leave things as is we would
have a memory leak right because my VAR went away.
But object A and B didn't and there's no way that they'll get destroyed.
Not for reference counting.
So that's where the garbage collector comes in the garbage collector would look and we'll be able to
identify these circular references and clean them up.
And so the memory goes away.
We we do get cleanup.
So the garbage collector can be controlled programmatically using the GC module there's a built in module
to Python call GC for garbage collector where you can interact with a garbage collector and you can
even modifieds behavior.
So by default garbage collection is turned on you can turn it off so you can turn it off but you really
have to be absolutely sure that your code is not creating circular references because if it does you
will end up with memory leaks and it's very easy to create circular references.
And you know without even knowing that you've created that circular reference.
So be very very careful if you do turn it off.
Now why would you want to turn it off.
Well it's really just performance reasons.
The garbage collector is something that runs periodically by default by every minute or so and it has
to identify these circular references so obviously it takes a little bit of you know computing power
to do so.
And so you may want to turn it off.
But this is really more advanced and you have to be careful.
I would just leave the garbage collector turned on.
Unless you have a specific need to turn it off.
So it runs on its own.
If it's turned on you can turn it off.
You can also call it manually and you can also interact with a garbage collector to see what's in there
and that needs to be cleaned up especially if you've turned it off and do your own cleanup.
And so some people do that.
There's other ways you can also avoid having to do your own clean up.
You can use weak references.
There's a variety of things that you can do.
We'll look at weak references when we get to the sections on object oriented programming.
But for now just be aware the garbage collector is there to really clean up circular references.
It's turned on by default and you really should leave it on.
So in general it works just fine.
But as always there's a caveat it doesn't always work.
But this really applies to Python versions of less than 3.4.
So if as long as you're using Python 3 4 and above 3:6 as we are this recording then you're fine.
What was happening before is that if even one of the objects in the circular references had a destructive.
So for example if you're creating your own class you can create a construct constructor for the class.
Yes but you can also create a destructor.
Now the destructor is code that you run when you're destroying the object.
And typically you might put things in there that might be cleaning up files maybe deleting files that
you created that were needed during the duration of that object may maybe closing a database connection
whatever it is.
And you would put that code in these and in the delete method in this donder the elder Dundon method.
So if even one of the objects in the circular reference has a destructive then the order of the destructors
might be important.
Write the order in which you destroy your object might be important maybe you cannot close the database
connection until some other class that you have there was dependent or that was in the circular reference
maybe deletes or commits a transaction or rollback back a transaction.
Who knows.
Right.
There could be steps or as a certain order in which those steps have to be taken.
So the garbage collector doesn't know what that order should be.
And it would basically mark those objects as uncollectable they would say you know what.
I don't know how to handle this.
I'm not going to do that.
And so when you have that situation with a circular reference where at least one of the objects had
a destructor then they weren't getting cleaned up.
Not by the garbage collector.
And of course not by reference counting.
And we would end up with a memory leak.
Now that is no longer the case with version 3 4 and up.
That particular problem has been resolved.
So I really suggest that you do not use Python less than 3.4.
Right.
Use Python 3 4 and above.
All right.
So let's take a look at some code and just put the garbage collector module through its paces and see
what happens with circular references.
So the first thing we're going to do is we're going to import the C types library call from the last
video that's we're going to use that to look at the reference count given a memory address.
We're also going to need to import GC which is the garbage collection module.
OK.
And we're going to bring back that same method that we had before to find the reference count for a
object at a given memory address and just returns C type.
See long the dot from address address that value.
OK.
So just what we had before.
Nothing new here.
Now what is new is we're going to look at a method that's going to dig into the garbage collector and
it will tell us whether that object exists in the garbage collector or not and we'll do that again by
memory address.
So we're going to define a new method let's call it.
Objects by id and will pass in the object id or the memory address.
And we're going to loop through every object in the garbage collector and we're going to call the objects
get objects method of the GC that will basically look at every object that's inside the garbage collector.
There's a lot of objects that get generated and that's going to be the easiest way for us to find the
object we're interested in and we'll say if Id of object equals equals the ID that we pass then.
Right so we're just going to compare memory addresses.
We're going to say return object exists right.
And if we don't if we exhaust the loop then we'll return not fund.
OK.
So this method is basically going to look at all the objects that are tracked by the garbage collector
and it will try and find the object that we're interested in by comparing the IDs
now there's another way that we can compare memory addresses and we'll get to that in some future lesson.
All right so now comes time to create those two classes that are going to create a circular reference.
So let's go ahead and create class Abe.
Now if you don't know object oriented programming in Python don't worry about it.
These are pretty straightforward.
And as I said we'll dig into objects in our programming and a lot more detail in a future section.
So we're going to create a constructor and that constructor is basically going to call on another class
that we haven't created yet.
And what it's going to do it's going to set it's be variable equal to the an instance of the class B
passing self.
Now self in this context means a right means this instance of A.
So we're going to pass the instance of A to B and in B's constructor will store that reference.
So right now we're setting up that circular reference in exactly the same way we had in that diagram
just a little while ago.
So we have that and then we're going to print some stuff out.
Let's go ahead and print a.
Will print out what self is and then we'll print out what B is and by printed out we're going to print
out the memory address so Dark's format.
So what are we going to print out for a self-soothing the A instance the self which is going to be the
instance of A is going to be Hecht's of ID of self.
Right
and
for B we're going to print pecks of ID of self doubt.
B OK.
So basically when the class instantiates itself we're going to print out the memory addresses of the
references we're going to print out the memory address of ourself the instance of A.
And we're also going to print out the memory address of the B instance that we created in this line
here in the constructor.
OK so that's class A.
Now we need to do class B and class B.
Again we're going to declare an initializer.
And here we're going to say self.
Now the initializer takes in an extra parameter.
Let's call it a right.
That is what's being passed when B calls we all get gets called gets constructed we pass in this reference
to a.
So that's going to come in here.
So be careful this self here in the self.
They don't mean the same thing.
Self refers to the instance of this class B self.
Here refers and this self and this self refers to the instance of class A in the code.
So here we're going to set self-taught eight equals eight.
Right.
So we're going to store the reference to a.
And we're going to print out something very similar.
So I'm going to copy paste.
But now of course we're in class B and we are going to print out ourselves.
But now we're not going to print out the we're going to print out a that's the internal variable a.
And so we're going to return the memory address of a k.
So now we've set up those two classes a and b with a circular reference.
The next step we are going to disable the garbage collector so we can see what's going on because if
we don't disable it then as references go away it's going to clean up the circular reference.
But I don't want to clean that up now because we really want to take a look at what's going on.
So we're going to disable the garbage collectors.
And now let's go ahead and create my van my van is just an instance of a.
And the initialiser for aid doesn't take any variable any parameter.
OK.
So as you can see both the constructor will be ran.
This is what it printed out.
It said its reference was this number here.
And then the reference for 8 was that 1 8 to have 16 whatever.
And you can see the constructor for a Rannells So now you can see that the memory address of a.
Here is the same as the memory address of a hinge.
Right.
This one is the object self.
And this is the BS dot a memory address.
Right.
This is the circular reference.
And then these two are also equal to each other.
Again this is the reference that a holes to be right.
This is the memory address of the instance of B and it's the same memory address here.
Now in fact we can look at the ID of my van.
Now what do you think that should be.
I'll let you think about it for a few seconds.
My VAR is pointing to a.
So the memory reference of my VAR should be exactly what it is which is this one right here.
OK.
So that matters.
So that's good.
Right so far so good.
OK.
So now I mean there's another way you can look at it as well.
Right.
We can look at print.
Let's say my.
The dot B and my VAR remember B is an instance of property of the class A.
So my var which is an instance of A has this property B and we can call hecks of ID of my VAR B.
We can also print.
Now we're going to print my VAR dot B.
Now my VAR dog B is an instance of Class B and it has a property called a.
So we can say Dot A.
And again we're going to print the memory address of that as well.
So if we print that you'll notice that B.
This should be the memory address for B.
Right.
Which is exactly this one here.
And this is the memory address from a.
Which is this one right here.
And you can see that we recovered the memory address from a by looking at the object instance of B.
So we have that circular reference.
All right so now let's take a look at a few things.
Let's go ahead and print let's print the reference count.
So I'm just going to print like this graph count.
Remember that method that we created right arm.
Actually before I do that I need to hold references to a and b so 8 or ID equals ID of a and b ID is
equal to the idea of B.
I don't need to store the idea of my VAR because it happens to be the same as the idea of a.
Since they are both pointing to the same object and I do here in
all idea of a is my VAR.
Sorry.
Right.
We don't have a variable a.
And the idea of B is simply my VAR to be.
OK that's all the better.
And again we can check that just to be absolutely sure.
OK.
We should probably.
I'm storing the decimal because that's what we need to pass to those two functions.
But I'll print out the hex version.
OK.
As you can see again a is this reference here.
And B.
Well my Voller B is this reference stuff here.
OK.
And you'll see why I'm storing those memory addresses.
We're going to need to have the stored memory addresses once those objects go away we won't be able
to access them by using my van because we're going to get rid of my VAR right.
So we're going to need to store those addresses.
All right.
So let's take a look at the.
We're going to call a method ref count of a ID.
Now what should that be while they should really be two right.
Because my VAR is pointing to a and b is pointing to a.
And that's indeed what we get.
Now what about the ref count for the B object.
Well the ref count is one right because only a is pointing to be.
So that all seems to work out.
Now we're also going to use that new method that we defined.
Remember this one up here.
Object by ID.
We're going to look in the garbage collector to see is that object there.
So we're going to say object by id and we're going to pass in the idea of.
And the object exists right.
Yeah.
OK cool.
That's what we expected.
And let's do the same thing for B.
And the object exists.
All right good.
So we have those references we see what the reference count is.
OK.
So now let's go ahead and set my VAR equal to none.
So basically I'm destroying that reference between my VAR and a object.
OK.
So now let's look at the reference count of 8.
And the reference count is 1 and then the reference count of B is also 1.
So as you can see we got rid of my vav but the stall pointers to a and b because that's a circular reference
is pointing to B and B is pointing back to a and reference counting therefore is not going to help us
out here because the reference count is non-zero.
That's where the garbage collector comes in.
Now we can check still make sure that those objects are indeed thought being tracked by the garbage
collector.
You can see the object still exists.
And we'll do the same thing with B.
And we can see the object still exists so those objects definitely are wrong.
They have a reference count and the garbage collector is tracking them.
But it hasn't cleaned them up.
Why.
Because we stopped the garbage collector remember.
OK.
So not something that you necessarily want to do.
So now we're going to run the garbage collector manually.
We're going to say GC dot collect.
And that's how you can run the garbage collector manually.
So now we ran the garbage collector and we're going to look at the object by ID of a underscore ID.
It's not phone gone right.
And let's take a look at the object by id of B underscore ID.
And it's not found.
It's no longer in memory.
So let's take a look at the reference count of a underscore ID Hoopes
What's the method call ref underscore counts
1 hour.
That's kind of weird right.
Should have destroyed that object.
What about the reference count for the.
That's weird.
Let's try that again.
Wol 1 2 5 4.
We have that many references to that memory address but that should be zero.
What about a
ball that's changed now it's some other big number.
Now the odds are that when you run this code yourself you'll get different numbers and you'll see them
fluctuating possibly.
So what's going on.
You want to think about that a little bit.
What is going on why we were not seeing the objects right.
If we try object by ID then the garbage collector tells us it's not in there.
But I'm getting a reference count for that object a dot ID and it seems to change over time if we do
it again.
Who knows what we're going to get while we get the same number.
But it's definitely not zero.
Well this is why we usually don't use memory addresses and we don't work with memory addresses in Python
unless you're trying to debug stuff where you're trying to do your own memory clean up.
You've got to be really careful using memory addresses what is that memory address right now.
Remember the memory address that we stored for a right.
It was up here somewhere.
OK.
A-Rod ID.
Right.
Was this value here right.
We still did an eight on the ID.
What's in there right now.
We don't know.
It could be something else it could be nothing.
Who knows.
But that object is no longer a right.
It's no longer what this variable here was it's no longer this instance of a.
It's something else.
And so try to get the reference count of a memory address that is no longer necessarily managed by Python
even or even if it is it's been reclaimed.
Remember the space the memory address that was used by that variable was reclaimed.
It's now being used for something else.
Yeah pretty obviously.
Right.
And so who knows what that means.
So you've got to be very careful using memory addresses.
It's OK to do this in this context.
It's OK when you're trying to debug stuff.
And it's OK if you understand what you're doing and as long as you're using a memory address for an
object that you know existed you know what it is.
But once the garbage collector ran it destroyed all the objects involved in that circular reference.
And those memory addresses we had stored are no longer applicable.
OK.
So you really have to be careful with that.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.